we're just a few kilometers away from
Israel's border with Gaza where Hamas
burst through and carried out the
October 7th Terror
attacks these Israeli families are
gathering here because they want to go
and live in Gaza which they sometimes
called G katif even as War continues to
bring death and destruction to
Palestinians in the
strip their signs read only settlements
will bring security and conquering
settling
winning you look in the Torah and you
see very simple the answer there you
know that Israel belongs to the Jews and
Gaza is Israel doesn't mean that you're
not allowed to live here if you're not
Jewish no but at the same time it
belongs to the
Jews the plan this evening was to drive
along the border with Gaza a symbolic
return but Heavy Rain forced organizers
to move everyone
indoors one of those organizers is
Daniela
Vice the 78-year-old has been involved
in establishing settlements in the
Israeli occupied West Bank for decades
these settlements often displace
Palestinians and are illegal under
international law she's been arrested
numerous times but sees her unof
approach as more efficient than anything
parliamentarians could
do no no member of can do what I do no
member people look for purpose and what
I give them is the love of our homeland
and this is they will why they will
follow me everywhere now Vice says she's
using her pressure group Nala to work
towards settling Gaza and she says it's
a realistic aim we publicized um the
fact that Nala movement is organizing
groups of families to settle the entire
area of Gaza and people
registered hundreds of families the
Arabs of Gaza will not stay in Gaza
period this rally may seem small but it
has outsized
connections their demands have been
echoed by two farri ministers in
Benjamin netanyahu's
government one of them is finance
minister Bal smotrich often described as
an ally of Vice they live in the same
occupied West Bank settlement the other
is national security minister itamar
benav who recently called for a return
to gush katif the main block of Israeli
settlements that once existed in the
Gaza Strip the defense minister
disagrees and Netanyahu says a return to
gush katif is unrealistic but his
government has not laid out an official
plan for gaza's
future NOA turulski is an independent
journalist who's been covering Netanyahu
for most of her career she says even
though the Prime Minister has given
bangir and smartr unprecedented power
resettling Gaza is different you can't
just occupy territory because the Prime
Minister wants to it has to be an entire
cabinet decision has to be voted on in
Parliament he hasn't said a word to them
because he needs them in order to stay
in power but what we see is that he lets
them keep talking about it he lets them
make this be a subject in the public
space even when this causes Israel
measurable and significant harm in the
on the global
stage that harm condemnation from
Israel's top allies the US and Germany
Egypt and Jordan which have
long-standing relations and peace
treaties with Israel have ruled out
resettling Palestinians on their
territory and for Palestinian themselves
Israeli discussions about uprooting them
from their homes brings back memories of
1948 when over 700,000 were forced to
flee in the war fought over Israel's
establishment despite International
resistance to a return of Israeli
settlements in Gaza NOA tarnopolski says
the ministers pushing the idea shouldn't
be ignored I think we're talking about
maybe a few thousand people who are
Fringe figures led by opportunist IC
marginal extremists who think that they
can take advantage of this moment I I
think it's important to cover them
because they do have power right now
because they're sitting in
government and yet Fringe ideas
discussed by demonstrators here in a
basement can also be found in wider
Society a survey conducted by the he
University found 33% of respondents in
favor of annexing and resettling Gaza
another one by Israeli Channel 12 showed
44% of respondents in favor of
reestablishing settlements in the strip
that survey found the figure jumped to
66% among netanyahu's
supporters calls for a Jewish return to
Gaza or gush katif are not new in Israel
but they have been getting louder since
the October 7th attacks to understand
the thinking Behind these calls we have
to look at Israel's recent history in
the Gaza strip a history laid out here
at the gush katif Museum in
Jerusalem in 1967 at the end of The Six
Day War Israel occupied the Gaza Strip
and other
territories almost 400,000 Palestinians
lived there over half of whom were
refugees from
elsewhere soon Israeli started building
settlements the largest block of which
was called gush
katif it was against international law
to be there but museum guide avner
Franklin believes the settlers made a
positive impact they turned the place
from a desert into a Garden of Eden this
was a picture taken about 10 or 15 years
later of the same
place gazin felt otherwise and violence
in the strip escalated it became
unsustainable for Israel to keep the
settlers there in 2004 the Israeli
government led by prime minister Ariel
shaon decided to unilaterally withdraw
from Gaza and Evacuate the more than
8,000 settlers living there the decision
divided Israeli Society for and
against resistance to the evacuation
culminated in 2005 with scenes like
these Israeli police officers and
soldiers forcibly removing settlers from
their
homes data itaki lived in gush katif for
years it was a completely betrayed
Ariel Shon he came many times and he
said he would go down to Raam to the
border with Egypt and say the only way
to protect the south of Israel is having
the civilians in gush katif it was
crime against the security of the state
of Israel against valume of of Zionism
values of Zionism and against the people
there were there but leaving Gaza did
not usher in an era of calm almost a
soon as the settlers were gone Hamas and
Gaza intensified rocket attacks on
Israel Israel continued to control
access to the territory and life for
civilians there kept getting worse the
next almost two decades were marked by
Wars and conflict that culminated in the
terror of October 7th
2023 it was the deadliest day for Jews
since the Holocaust almost 1,200 people
were killed
4,834 injured and over 200 200 were
kidnapped and taken to Gaza the
community's hardest hit were the kutum
right next to Gaza the
community daa says leftwing people
living there had strongly believed that
the 2005 disengagement would bring
peace so the Arabs were cheering when
they took us into the buses and then
when the buses went out the Kim were
standing there and cheering and they
were very happy when they took us out
out from the Gaza region and we told him
you were the you'll pray the pay the
price and you know I'm not happy I was
right data wants to return to where her
house in Gaza once stood and thinks
others should join her the Palestinians
who live there are not her concern we
give a solution to the Israelis that
today have to flee from their homes
because of the war Egypt can give a
solution to the people from Gaza that
flee from their homes because of the war
you know give them a solution they're
our enemy I can't give them a
solution here in Israel's parliament the
knesset some Representatives agreed that
having Israeli civilian and Military
presence in Gaza had kept a lid on
violence and that a return would
increase security oh hatal is a concent
member from Finance Minister betel smc's
Ultra nationalist party religious
Zionism we have to make sure that these
things will not happen again so we have
to control the area and again in order
to control the area we have to have the
Israeli Civic presence in these areas
he's himself a settler living in the
occupied West Bank which he refers to
with its Biblical name Judea and Samaria
why do civilians have to be there and
live in um sometimes very dangerous for
them environments when the state should
be the one securing borders Israel is a
beacon of peace and democracy in the
Middle East it's true we decided to live
in this region which is uh uh we have a
many neighbors who does not want us to
be here I'm talking about Gaza
specifically if he put if you put
civilians there that's the same thing
that's I live in a frat it's the same we
are I'm threatened by Palestinians in
what in Judea and Samaria in the Arab
cities of of the Palestinian Authority
each and every day why they don't have
the same capabilities like Hamas just
because of one thing because Israel is
security have the security control of
the area and have the Civic presence
with settlements with Jewish villages in
Jude and Samaria which are protecting uh
Tel Aviv which are protecting karaba and
all the cities the the Israeli cities we
have to do the same thing in Gaza the UN
says settler violence against
Palestinians in the West Bank has
reached unprecedented levels since
October 7th the Palestinian Authority
which governs parts of the occupied West
Bank recognizes the state of Israel
unlike Hamas and Gaza which like Iran
and Lebanon doesn't a hotel says
settlements on Palestinian territory
would send a message to the whole region
to all the enemies that we having in
this neighborhood telling them that if
you're killing Israelis if you're
killing babies if you're raping women
you will pay price that you consider as
something that is for you a heavy price
and that's land and that's land the only
price is land now I think the world also
should support humanitarian evacuation
of Palestinians from Gaza because it's
for their own good when Palestinians
when Palestinians hear that they think
permanent displacement they don't think
evacuation they think that they're
being kicked out of their so I I offer
something very simple let's just open
the borders and we'll see who wants to
stay and who wants to
leave back at the Museum which was
founded by a right-wing group involved
in the campaign to remain in Gaza
interest in gush kati's past and a
possible Revival is growing tours are
booked for months in advance avner tells
me and t-shirts like these are high in
demand it
says let's go home we're going back to
gush katif and people want to buy this
today there's been a tremendous uh
interest this manura once stood in a
synagogue in Gaza this past Hanukkah the
museum arranged for it to be taken back
to Gaza for Israeli soldiers fighting
there it was very very emotional and
then they brought it back here and this
is where it stays in the meantime it's
on loan to us and when we go back to
narim and we have our synagogue there
we're going to put this back in the
place that it came from Franklin and
others here tell me living in Gaza or
gush Ka is not only about security but
something that God has promised to the
Jewish people they see things like this
a replica of a mosaic believed to be
from the floor of a gazen synagogue
dating back to the Byzantine era as
proof that their Roots Run Deep there
it's our connection it's our bond to the
place you see the fact look we have for
me the fact that we have a bond to the
place a connection to the place that
means a lot you know that it's mine of
journalist noga tarnopolski says the
campaign for a return to Gaza is not
what most Israelis are concerned with in
the aftermath of October 7th it is part
of a very dangerous thing we're seeing
which is this Chasm between what average
Israeli citizens want and need and are
scared of or are demanding and what
their government is actually
doing the US has repeatedly said it
opposes any Israeli reoccupation of Gaza
in his January 2024 visit to Israel US
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin said
this on Notions of Palestinian
displacement Palestinian civilians must
be able to return home as soon as
conditions allow they must not be
pressed to leave Gaza blinkin said that
genuine security for Israel requires a
two-state solution
meaning a Palestinian State alongside
Israel that two-state solution is
something Netanyahu has repeatedly
rejected something he and Daniela Vice
agree on her work now focuses on
creating so-called outposts these are
settlements which even the Israeli
government considers illegal in the
occupied West Bank creating facts on the
ground ground which many in the
International Community say should form
the core of any future Palestinian state
I'm so glad I'm not blinking because
what he says is not is not smart there
is no chance no chance whatsoever for
two-state solution it seems that he
takes some some paper and reads and
someone forgot to tell him in the
administration that it's not relevant
and he keeps reading from it he I mean
he he
reiterates in my eyes in an embarrassing
manner we uh uh um have now
800,000 Jews living in 250 settlements
in Judean Samaria where will you put Mr
blink and where will you put your
two-state solution where are you going
to do it in the West Bank settlers have
often gotten government recognition for
settlements they built illegally after
the fact it's not government policy y to
allow settlements in Gaza but Vice says
she may not wait and may take a similar
approach there what we are going to do
and telling you secretly we are going to
squat close to the border right now
there is a border that uh prevents us
from uh entering but maybe um the
northern part of Gaza which is actually
not under uh any uh formal sovereignty
it's called the no man's land
so maybe over there there will it will
be
easier so once we
start uh then once there is an opening
then there will be the second stage and
the third stage it will happen in my
lifetime okay this prime minister has a
track record of giving these extremists
things that nobody ever dreamed them or
anyone even in their position in their
office would have then why is it
unrealistic uh or why should we not take
their demands to reoccupy Gaza seriously
because it seems that they have a very
good track record of getting things done
in this country so that's a very good
question and the answer is a bit complex
but it's a really good question so I
want us to address
it you mentioned natan's track record
and what you're mentioning is a recent
track record Nan's been prime minister
for 15 16 years and his actual track
record is one of stasis Netanyahu has
been the guy who just tried to like keep
the status quo and say I'm the hero for
many of these years he's not himself
particularly radical he's himself very
self-interested he wants to preserve his
own power and for many years the best
way he saw to preserve power was simply
let's keep everything on a kind of low
heat everything will be okay what
changed everything is that in 2019 he
was indicted for very serious crimes of
corruption and all of a sudden he began
to perceive the state the institutions
of State the police that investigated
him the Judiciary that indicted him and
that was putting him on trial he began
to perceive them as his enemies this is
the event that
radicalized Netanyahu first of all
against the institutions of state and
secondly politically cuz the entire
center of the Israeli political Arena
took a step back from him didn't want to
sit in government with an indicted
criminal so he ended up becoming more
and more dependent on these marginal
figures many of whom themselves are
criminals convicted criminals they
didn't care if he's a crook or an
indicted crook so he was radicalized on
various levels so his track record in
fact during the last year is extremely
radical he returned to power December
29th 2022 and his first step was to
attempt what he called a Judicial reform
which in fact was uh what in Spanish we
call an aogpe he attempted to take power
of state and had he
succeeded he would have had unfettered
power and the questions that you ask
would have been terrifying questions
because had he succeeded he would have
probably tried to issue orders that
today remain illegal orders but it's
unclear whether they would be still
illegal and I think it's important to
mention um netanyahu's attempted coup
provoked massive protests in Israel
massive uh millions of people protesting
in a country of just 10 million Israelis
are very um aware of the limits of the
power power of their prime minister so
that what really radicalized the Israeli
public was in late March
2023 the defense minister made a
statement a warning that he's obliged
under the law to make as minister of
defense and he said that if the
government continued to purs pursue this
judicial reform it was endangering
National Security Netanyahu responded by
firing him on the spot with immediate
effect this sent I think half a million
Israelis to the street that night why
you may ask because Israelis know that
if they don't have a defense minister
who's independent that is the first step
towards an authoritarian takeover
Israelis were scared to death and
Netanyahu was forced basically by public
opposition to undo that firing and the
reason I can have this conversation with
you today and say netan never says no to
these two radical ministers but de facto
he can't really give them what they want
is because the Israeli people stood up
and stopped him and that is a remarkable
thing